# Thoughts on the Hunger Games

*Originally published on April 8th, 2013*

I know I'm a little behind the curve here but I finally watched the Hunger Games. My opinions are so overwhelmingly positive that I want to get my one negative thought out of the way as soon as possible. That is, for my overly sensitive pet-owner taste, this (literally) killer dog...


...looks a little bit too much like this already misunderstood breed:


My concern isn't totally misfounded. The Maryland Court of Appeals ruled last year that Pit Bulls are inherently dangerous. This conclusion is not backed up by science, but rather by stereotypes that were viscerally reinforced by the creatures that tear apart District #1's tribute in the Hunger Games.

But anyways, that's my only real beef. On the other hand, the movie overall was surprisingly moving and understated considering it is targeted towards the same audience that ate up the Twilight movies. Jennifer Lawrence was fantastic as usual. The final scene with Rue had me in tears. The range of emotions she can portray without saying a word is truly impressive.

But seriously, she really is a fantastic actress.
As I often do when a movie starts to make me think, I decided to see what the late, great Roger Ebert had to say about The Hunger Games. Ebert gave the film 3 stars (out of 4) saying:

 >"“The Hunger Games” is an effective entertainment, and Jennifer Lawrence is strong and convincing in the central role. But the film leapfrogs obvious questions in its path, and avoids the opportunities sci-fi provides for social criticism; compare its world with the dystopias in “Gattaca” or “The Truman Show.”  Director Gary Ross and his writers (including the series' author, Suzanne Collins) obviously think their audience wants to see lots of hunting-and-survival scenes, and has no interest in people talking about how a cruel class system is using them. Well, maybe they're right. But I found the movie too long and deliberate as it negotiated the outskirts of its moral issues." 

First of all, I think The Hunger Games (both novel and film) are more concerned with showing rather than telling. This fits with Katniss' character, a caring, yet quiet and practical protagonist. She observes and acts, rather than discussing what she sees. Furthermore, I would argue that a critique of a petty, voyeuristic society is not the central purpose of The Hunger Games but is rather corollary to an exploration of how to react in the face of unjust and dehumanizing violence.

Despite its secondary role, a satirical critique is present, and it might be easy to dismiss because of its phantasmagorical nature. Scenes in the Capitol of Panem carry a completely different tone those that take place outside. Citizens of the Capitol wear fabrics of garish color with gaudy accessories. All the furniture and technologies have cheap plastic quality that suggests disposable consumerism. At several moments, I couldn't help but compare the style to that of the dystopic master Terry Gilliam.

It would be easy as an audience member to dismiss the citizens of the Capitol as caricatures that bear little to no resemblance to reality. That would be a mistake. Certainly the styles and tastes of these people are crass to a heightened degree, but the cruel glee with which they watch young adults slaughtering each other is strangely familiar.

Yes, the televised voyeurism we participate in today does not result in the murder of human beings, but that doesn't mean it isn't damaging and unhealthy. I'm not going to pretend that I don't enjoy reality television. It's definitely not my favorite genre, but I'll contently watch shows like The Jersey Shore, Hoarders, and Here Comes Honey Boo Boo if you put them in front of me. Most of us, if honest, will admit that part of the appeal of these shows is how watching the self-destructive shenanigans of the stars makes we viewers feel better about ourselves. Watching Snooki fall over intoxicated in the sand before getting arrested by cops  makes us think, "At least that shit'll never happen to me."

But by watching these shows, at least in some small way we are cheapening our collective moral integrity. If not careful, we forget that the people on the other side of the screen are real people too. Yes, they are well compensated for their time, but at what cost? Snooki was only able to gain fame for her damaged actions because we decided these actions were entertaining enough to reinforce with our viewership. And now she has a kid. Even if she wanted to, will Ms. Polizzi be able to give any semblance of a stable, nurturing life to her son? Sure he'll have money, but does that mean he'll be healthy or well-adjusted?

Entertainment, in its more established forms, rigidly separates the entertainer from the entertainee. People gather around a heightened stage and watch the entertainer perform. Those who try to join the performer are forcefully removed by security. The Internet has enabled new opportunities for barriers between content creators and consumers to break. Through their Vlogbrothers project and other offshoots, John and Hank Green have capitalized on interaction with their fans to a phenomenal degree. Each year they raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for charity by collaboratively sharing videos their fans have made about favorite non-profits and organizations. The Green brothers run an online marketplace dftba.com that regularly features products designed by fans, who receive generous proportions of earned profits. Although, I don't know as much about her, Amanda Palmer of the Dresden Dolls also does a great job at breaking down entertainer/entertainee barriers. See her TED talk here.

One cost of maintaining artificial separation between content creators and consumers on the Internet is dehumanization. When we ignore the real person behind a video blog, article, or twitter feed we tend to say hurtful or insensitive things behind the guise of supposed anonymity or obsolescence. That is, we think that because we have a fake username and because the content creator will never read what we have to say, we have license to write whatever we want. But again, these semi-public content creators do inevitably read a least some of the things written about them. Emily from the Brain Scoop seems to have issues with people saying things like, “Your new name is Nerd Hot.  How’s it going, Nerd Hot?” or simply with people trying to set her up with this other internet personality with whom she is real life friends. This collective internet effort to set people up with other people actually has a name called "shipping" and it is thoughtfully spoken about here by Liam Dryden.  

What does all of this have to do with The Hunger Games? Like the marginalized gladiators in the Roman Republic, the children in the Hunger Games represent the ultimate dehumanizing consequence of separating entertainers and entertainees. Citizens of Panem are conditioned to think of the combatants as something less than human. There is the official rationale that The Hunger Games are necessary for maintaining order and structure to the nation, but the cold truth is that the citizens of the Capitol don't care about those living in the satellite districts, they are resources to be used for accumulation of wealth and for entertainment.

Katniss wins the Hunger Games not because she is extremely adept with a bow (which she is), but because she finds a way to infuse her fight for survival with humanity. When her young companion Rue dies, she takes the precious time to lay an elaborate pattern of flowers around her body and salutes Rue's district through the TV cameras. Even though she hates vulnerability, Katniss allows herself to be wrapped up in a quasi-romantic relationship with Peeta for all the people of Panem to see. When her enemy Cato is being torn up by the aforementioned Pit Bull monster things, she shoots him with an arrow rather than let him suffer. Finally, when the dungeon-master game-controller Seneca Crane reneges on his promise to allow two entrants of the same district to survive the games, Katniss shows her willingness to poison herself rather than kill Peeta.

What are we to do in the face of indifference, insensitivity, and hate? The example of Katniss suggests we emphasize our humanity. We allow ourselves to be vulnerable, to show our face amidst the digital noise even at the risk of being personally attacked. We remind ourselves that even deplorable people are people and that something guided them down the road that led to our ire. In short we all deserve love, respect, and a second chance, but if we don't get it, The Hunger Games suggest we not complain, but rather remind the world who are and why we matter. Anyways, that's what I take away from the movie/book.
