# Does being a scientist mean I can't be Christian too?

*Originally published March 26th, 2013*

I don't really want to go to church, but it may not be why you might think.

Context: Observing the mass migration of youth out of the church, my dad has been grappling with how to reach and remain relevant to young people. See an overview here.

Tonight my dad sent me a link to this article which attempts to explain why we young folk leave the church. Perhaps more than any other attempt I've seen, Mr. Solas' psychological profile explains why young people don't really need the church any more, or at least the church as it has evolved in the past few decades. I think he's right on, but even if churches were able to sort out the issues they have with shallow, feeling-based worship, pandering attempts at hipness, and ten-step programs to life-fulfillment, I probably still wouldn't return to formal church services. I'm not going to say it will never happen, but my issues with the church reach deeper than the stylistic choices of individual congregations.

To be clear, I still stubbornly wish to think of myself as Christian, or at least as a Christian-skeptic. The core principles of Christianity profoundly shape my moral inclinations, that is that true justice is not rooted in the Law, or in precise book-keeping of past deeds, but in the relinquishment of law, in the sanctification of love, forgiveness, and sacrifice for others at the expense of oneself. That, to me, is the Good News you always hear Christians talking about. I will always be a human being who commits hateful deeds, but I can and have been forgiven, over and over again.

Too often, I think churches build themselves off of other foundations. To me, what happens to me after I die is besides the point. Churches seem obsessed with prescribing the proper formulation of rote-phrases and good deeds that will buy their congregants a place in heaven. If there is an afterlife, and if I get sorted into "Heaven" rather than "Hell", justice dictates that I will never be truly worthy of the pure woolly goodness of Heaven. If I get to Heaven, it will because of mercy and forgiveness, not because of something I've said, done, or believed.

The problem to me with placing your salvation in faith is that it forces a static lock on your belief system. If there are rigid, specific beliefs that get you into Heaven, then by God you better not err away from them because who knows when you might fall over dead and miss your chance at eternal bliss because you changed how you thought about something. There's a reliance on hard fast rules of morality and truth, which breeds arrogance as people become increasingly entrenched in their ideas.

Rigid faith goes against every other foundation of my worldview. To clarify, I want to talk about two very important classes I took in high school and college. The first important class was AP Lang with Stephanie Long at Traverse City West. AP Lang taught me to see the inherent assumptions, strategies, and arguments in every composition. News articles, plays, poems, blog posts, essays, and novels are all documents to be actively engaged. Each has been formulated a certain way, whether consciously or not, to make you feel or think a certain way. The more you understand the rhetorical devices employed by writers and artists, the better you can assess whether arguments are valid, whether your emotions are being manipulated, and whether someone's logic is fallacious or not. AP Lang was empowering but it also shook my faith in texts that I had taken for granted. I like that it left me always wanting to probe and question, but it also made me distrustful of hard and fast truth. There's always another argument to be made.

Introduction to Experimental Biology with Pat Heithaus at Kenyon gave me a method for empirically evaluating truth, that is, the scientific method. Importantly, it taught me why hypothesis, experimentation, and statistics matter. People who think that science is about collating together facts to be memorized are missing the point. Science isn't truth, it's a method for probing it. Once you have drawn data from experiments, you can use statistics to evaluate certainty and uncertainty. Importantly, statistics always allow for the some degree of uncertainty. Good experiments can't tell you absolute truth, they can only tell you approximations with varying levels of certainty depending on the magnitude of your samples, comprehensiveness of your controls, and complexities of your variables. Science seeks truth, but not only does it allow for future revision, it demands it from peer reviewers and rival experimenters.

Can you see what I'm hinting at? I'm asking for Christianity and science to learn a little something from each other.

Christianity, I love your philosophy, but can we stop pretending that faith must forgo change? I don't want to go to church and listen to someone tell me they have everything figured out for me, I need only do what they say. I want to start questioning the Truth. And I'm sorry, but answering complex moral and theological questions with just the Bible seems stupid to me, as if the body of human experience that came after the establishment of the Biblical canon has no bearing. It also edges way too closely to confirmation bias. You know what your conclusion is before you start searching, then you pick and choose from the Bible to support your idea (which was probably derived from the Bible in the first place). Too much circular logic for me. Is it heresy to say I'm not sure how I feel about Resurrection, or the afterlife, or miracles? Does God forbid me from picking apart and reconstructing these ideas with whatever evidence I can find?

Science, you're not off the hook either. I once heard a professor whom I deeply respect tell me that faith or belief has no place in science. I think that's stupid too. To deny the existence of faith in our theories is to deny that even the best models rely on the statistics of uncertainty, on data collected by error prone human beings, and on the precision of instruments that can always be improved.

Christianity, science, I think there's truth out there, and I think we've done a decent job of hashing it out so far, but we can always do better. There is yet more to discover and learn. Let's not pretend otherwise.
